.. _scanning-strategy:

Scanning strategy
=================

The LiteBIRD Simulation Framework provides a set of tools to simulate
the orbit of the spacecraft and compute the directions where each
detector is looking at the sky as a function of time. The time stream
of directions and orientations of each detector is usually called
*pointing information*, and we will consistently use this jargon in
the documentation.

Note that this chapter only deals with the *direction* along which
some detector is looking, but the actual position/velocity of the
spacecraft is optional when doing this calculation. The framework
provides other facilities to compute this information, and they are
described in :ref:`dipole-anisotropy`.

This chapter provides an in-depth explanation of how to use the
facilities provided by the framework to compute the pointing
information for any detector in one of the focal planes.

The motion of the spacecraft
----------------------------

In the case of a space mission like LiteBIRD, the motion of the
spacecraft and its structure decide where each detector is looking at
each time. The following video depicts the kind of motion simulated by
our framework:

.. raw:: html

    <iframe
        width="560"
        height="315"
        src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/Nh7pMSrVDZs"
        frameborder="0"
        allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture"
        allowfullscreen>
    </iframe>

(The animation was created using `POV-Ray <http://povray.org/>`_, and
the files used to create it are available on `GitHub
<https://github.com/ziotom78/povray_scanning_strategy>`_ .)

You can see that there are *two* rotations in the animation: the
spacecraft spins quickly around its spin axis (grey axis), but this
axis does not stand still: it performs a precession around the blue
axis, which represents the Sun-Earth direction. (You should imagine
the Earth on the left and the Sun on the far left.)

Note that the detectors are not necessarily aligned with the spin
axis; in fact, the animation shows the actual direction of observation
for two different detectors as two red and green lines: you can see
that they are looking at two opposite sides of the spin axis. Every
detector looks along its direction, but detectors belonging to the
same instrument (e.g., LFT) look not far away from each other; it is
customary to express their pointing directions relative to an
«average» direction, called the *boresight direction*, which is the
main optical axis of the instrument. In LiteBIRD, there are *three*
instruments (LFT, MFT, HFT), so there should be *three* boresight
directions; however, MFT and HFT share the same telescope, and thus it
is customary to show only one boresight for both. This is the true
meaning of the red and green axes in the video above: the red axis
represents the «average» direction where LFT detectors are looking,
and the green axis is the same for MFT/HFT.

The animation does not show a *third* rotation happening, which is the
revolution of the spacecraft around the Sun, taking one year to
complete. (Including it in the video would have been useless, as it is
*really* slow when compared with the spin and precession!). Thus, the
motion of the spacecraft is the composition of *three* rotations:

1. Rotation of the spacecraft around the spin axis (grey line);

2. Rotation (precession) of the spin axis around the Sun-Earth axis
   (blue line);

3. Yearly rotation of the Sun-Earth axis around the Sun.

If you think about it, you will realize that the following quantities
can fully describe the kinematics of this motion:

- The angle between the spin axis and the boresight direction(s),
  usually called β;

- The angle between the spin and Sun-Earth axes is usually called α.

- The speed of the rotation of the boresight direction around the spin
  axis;

- The speed of the precession around the Sun-Earth axis, which is
  usually slower than the rotation speed;


They are sketched in the following diagram:

.. image:: images/litebird-scanning-strategy.svg

These parameters define the so-called *scanning strategy*, i.e., how
the instruments observe the sky during the mission lifetime. The
LiteBIRD Simulation Framework provides all the tools necessary to
simulate the composition of these rotations, and it can produce
pointing information from the synthetic description of the scanning
strategy. Here is a complete example using the scanning strategy
proposed for CORE (:cite:`2018:core:delabrouille`), which is
qualitatively similar to what is going to be used for LiteBIRD:

.. testcode::

  import litebird_sim as lbs
  import astropy.units as u
  import numpy as np

  sim = lbs.Simulation(
      start_time=0,
      duration_s=60.0,
      description="Simple simulation",
      random_seed=12345,
  )

  # We now simulate the motion of the spacecraft over a time span
  # of one minute (specified in the `duration_s` parameter above).
  sim.set_scanning_strategy(
      scanning_strategy=lbs.SpinningScanningStrategy(
          spin_sun_angle_rad=np.deg2rad(30), # CORE-specific parameter
          spin_rate_hz=0.5 / 60.0,     # Ditto
          # We use astropy to convert the period (4 days) in
          # seconds
          precession_rate_hz=1.0 / (4 * u.day).to("s").value,
      )
  )

  # Here we specify the β angle of the focal plane of
  # the instrument
  sim.set_instrument(
      lbs.InstrumentInfo(
          name="core",
          spin_boresight_angle_rad=np.deg2rad(65),
      ),
  )

  # We include a fake boresight detector `det`, belonging
  # to the instrument `core` (unlike LiteBIRD, CORE had only one focal
  # plane and one instrument)
  det = lbs.DetectorInfo(name="foo", sampling_rate_hz=10)

  # By default, `create_observations` creates just *one* observation
  obs, = sim.create_observations(detectors=[det])

  # Prepare the quaternions needed to compute the pointings, i.e.,
  # the direction in the sky where the detector is looking at as
  # a function of time
  sim.prepare_pointings()

  # `get_pointings()` returns both the pointing matrix and the
  # HWP angle; we ignore the latter with `_`, as we do not have
  # a HWP here. The pointing matrix contains the angles (θ, φ, ψ)
  # for each sample in the TOD and each detector.
  pointings, _ = obs.get_pointings(0)

  print("Shape:", pointings.shape)
  print("Pointings:")
  print(np.array_str(pointings, precision=3))

.. testoutput::

  Shape: (600, 3)
  Pointings:
  [[ 2.182 -0.    -1.571]
   [ 2.182 -0.006 -1.576]
   [ 2.182 -0.012 -1.582]
   ...
   [ 0.089 -2.967 -1.738]
   [ 0.088 -3.021 -1.687]
   [ 0.087 -3.075 -1.635]]

We explain all the details of this code in the following sections, so
for now, keep in mind the overall shape of the code:

1. Once we set the duration of the simulation (one minute in the
   example above), we call the method
   :meth:`.Simulation.set_scanning_strategy`, which forces the
   framework to compute how the orientation of the spacecraft with
   respect to the sky sphere evolves with time. This method produces a
   set of quaternions, which encode the result of the composition of
   all the rotations (spin, precession, revolution around the Sun)
   described above; LBS saves these quaternions in the
   ``spin2ecliptic_quats`` field of the ``sim`` class. For more
   information about quaternions, see :ref:`quaternions-chapter` .

2. When the simulation code needs to determine where a detector is
   pointing to (the detector ``det`` in our example), it uses the
   quaternions to retrieve (1) the coordinates on the Sky sphere,
   and (2) the orientation angle (ψ). LBS computes both quantities in
   the Ecliptic reference frame using the sampling rate of the
   detector, which in our example is 10 Hz (i.e., ten samples per
   second). In the example above, this is done by the function
   :func:`.get_pointings`.

3. The method :meth:`.Observation.get_pointings` returns an array with
   either 2 or 3 fields depending on the argument passed:

   - if the caller passes an integer, LBS interprets this as the index
     of the detector in the observation and returns a ``(N, 3)``
     matrix where the first column contains the colatitude
     :math:`\theta`, the second column the longitude :math:`\phi`, and
     the third column the orientation angle :math:`\psi`. All the
     angles are expressed in radians.

   - if the caller passes a list of indices, LBS interprets it as a
     list of detectors in the observation for which the caller wants
     to compute the pointing. It returns a ``(D, N, 3)`` matrix where
     D represents the detector index, N the index of the sample, and
     the three final columns are the same described in the first case.

   - if the caller passes the string "all", LBS returns a ``(D, N,
     3)`` matrix containing the pointing information for all the
     detectors in the observation.

   These angles are expressed in the Ecliptic Coordinate System, where
   the Equator is aligned with the Ecliptic Plane of the Solar System.


Computing the orientation of the spacecraft
-------------------------------------------

To compute where a detector is looking at the sky sphere, there is a
number of transformations that need to be carried out:

.. image:: images/coordinate-systems.svg

We start from the detector reference frame, where the main beam of the
radiation pattern is aligned with the `z` axis and is oriented using
the `x` axis as the reference axis. (In other words, the `x` axis
provides a reference frame for asymmetric beams.)

The next reference frame is the *boresight*, and to convert from the
detector reference frame to the boresight there is a rotation, which
is encoded in a rotation quaternion that is saved in the IMO. The
framework implements the class :class:`.RotQuaternion` to encode a
rotation quaternion; this class can also model time-varying rotations,
which can be useful to simulate vibrations and wobbles in the optical
structure of the instruments.

Next, we move from the reference frame of the boresight to that of the
spacecraft. The class :class:`.InstrumentInfo` encodes the information
about the placement of the boresight with respect to the spin axis.
After this transformation, the spin axis is aligned with the `z` axis.

The next transformation goes from the spacecraft to the Ecliptic
reference frame; the Ecliptic is on the `xy` plane, and the `z` axis
points towards the Ecliptic North Pole. In this case, the framework
provides two ways to compute the transformation:

1. The revolution of the Earth around the Sun is modeled using a plain
   circular motion, and the starting position is arbitrary; this mode
   is triggered whenever the time is tracked using floating-point
   numbers (i.e., the parameter `start_time` in the constructor of
   :class:`.Simulation` is a ``float``).

2. The proper motion of the Earth around the Sun is computed using
   ephemeridis tables; the calculation is much slower, but the result
   enables to properly simulate the observation of moving objects in
   the Solar System, like planets or asteroids. In this case, the
   parameter `start_time` must be an instance of the class
   ``astropy.time.Time``. In the example above, we would enable the
   computation of the proper motion of the Earth with the following
   minor change::

     import astropy.time

     sim = lbs.Simulation(
         # Turn on full computation of the Earth orbit around the Sun
         start_time=astropy.time.Time("2020-01-01"),
         duration_s=60.0,
         description="Simple simulation",
         random_seed=12345,
     )

You should compute the proper motion of the Earth around the Sun only
if you need to, as it makes the computation of the pointing
information 10÷100 times slower.


From quaternions to detector pointings
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To compute the pointing information for a detector, the quaternions
computed through the call to :meth:`.Simulation.set_scanning_strategy`
are not enough, as they only tell how to convert a vector from the
*spin axis* reference frame to the Ecliptic reference frame. We need
two more quaternions that tell how to convert from the reference frame
of the detector to that of the spin axis:

1. The first quaternion describes how the detector reference frame
   (with the `z` axis aligned with the main axis of the radiation
   pattern) can be converted to the reference frame of the focal plane
   (with the `z` axis aligned with the boresight). This information is
   included in the IMO and is properly initialized if you call
   :meth:`.DetectorInfo.from_imo`. If you do not specify any
   quaternion, the constructor for :class:`.DetectorInfo` will assume
   that the detector is looking at the boresight. It will thus create
   a default :class:`.RotQuaternion` object, which corresponds to the
   identity quaternion :math:`(0 0 0 1)`; this is the case of the
   simple example we presented above.

2. The second quaternion describes how to convert the reference frame
   of the focal plane (with the `z` axis aligned with the boresight)
   to the reference frame of the spacecraft (where the `z` axis is
   aligned with its spin axis). This quaternion is stored in the field
   ``bore2spin_quat`` of the class :class:`.InstrumentInfo`, and it is
   initialized when you call the method
   :meth:`.Simulation.set_scanning_strategy`.

The LiteBIRD Simulation Framework recomputes the orientation of the
spacecraft with a regular spacing in time (the default is one minute).
However, pointings need to be known at the same sampling frequency
used by the detector, which is usually much higher than the frequency
used to compute the quaternions (in our example above, the sampling
frequency of detector ``det`` was 10 Hz, but the sampling frequency of
the quaternions was 1/60 Hz). Since the framework uses quaternions to
encode the orientation of the spacecraft, oversampling them to the
sampling frequency of the detector is just a matter of applying a
spherical linear interpolation (abbr. `slerp
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Slerp>`_), according to the following
figure:

.. image:: images/quaternion-sampling.svg

To be sure to include an additional quaternion *after* the last
sample, like in the figure above, the framework provides the static
method :meth:`.ScanningStrategy.optimal_num_of_quaternions`, which
computes how many quaternions are needed to cover some period with a
given interval between quaternions. For instance, if our simulation
lasts 100 s and we want one quaternion every minute, then the number
of quaternions needed is 3: one at :math:`t = 0`, one at :math:`t =
60\,\mathrm{s}`, and one at :math:`t = 120\,\mathrm{s}`, so that the
latter two can be interpolated for the samples in the range
:math:`60\,\mathrm{s} \leq t \leq 100\,\mathrm{s}`. Here is how the
function works:

.. testcode::

   print(lbs.ScanningStrategy.optimal_num_of_quaternions(
       time_span_s=100,
       delta_time_s=60,
   ))

.. testoutput::

   3

When using MPI, the relatively small size in memory of the quaternions
(the thick black lines in the figure) enables the framework to keep
a duplicate of the list in all the MPI processes. This is unlike
what happens with the data in TODs (the thin gray lines), which are
split in several blocks inside the :class:`.Observation` class.

.. note::

   Slerp assumes a rotation with constant angular speed and axis
   between consecutive quaternions. Thus, it only approximates the
   proper composition of all the rotations (spin, precession,
   revolution around the Sun) that we discussed above. However,
   remember that the *actual* spacecraft will follow a scanning
   strategy that will be more complex than the one described by our
   geometrical model because of many unavoidable non-idealities in a
   spacecraft. The approximation of the «slerp» operation is thus
   unlikely to be relevant.

Once LBS has all the quaternions sampled at the proper sampling rate,
it can compute the direction of the detector on the sky and its
orientation angle through :meth:`.Observation.get_pointings`. The
calculation works as follows:

- The direction is the vector :math:`\vec d = R \hat e_z`, where
  :math:`R` is the overall rotation from the detector reference frame
  to the Ecliptic reference frame, and :math:`\hat e_z = (0, 0, 1)` is
  the one-length vector aligned with the `z` axis.

- The orientation angle is given by the angle between the North
  direction passing through the vector :math:`\vec d` (i.e., along the
  meridian of :math:`\vec d`) and the vector :math:`\vec p = R \hat
  e_x`, where :math:`R` is the same as above and :math:`\hat e_x = (1,
  0, 0)`, as shown in the following figure (note that :math:`\hat e_x`
  has been drawn twice because the one in the upper side represents
  the orientation direction in the detector reference frame):

  .. image:: images/orientation-direction.svg

The purpose of the method :meth:`.Simulation.prepare_pointings`, used
in the example at the beginning of this chapter, is to combine the
quaternions that model the transformations between the many reference
frames used in the framework. The method
:meth:`.Observation.get_pointings` uses these quaternions to compute
the actual pointing directions and the HWP angle on the fly.

To save memory,:meth:`.Observation.get_pointings` does *not* save the
pointings in a variable once it has calculated their value, and so
they must be recomputed every time you need them. However, in some
applications, pointings need to be accessed several times during a
simulation, and these repeated computations can introduce a noticeable
slowdown in the code.

If you want to trade speed with memory occupation, you can use the
function :func:`.precompute_pointings` to compute all the pointings at
once and save them into every :class:`.Observation` objects. This
function fills the fields `pointing_matrix` and `hwp_angle`. The
datatype for the pointings is specified by ``pointings_dtype``. This
can be done either with the low level functions ::

    obs = sim.create_observations(detectors=[det])
    lbs.prepare_pointings(obs,sim.instrument,sim.spin2ecliptic_quats)
    lbs.precompute_pointings(obs, pointings_dtype=np.float64)

or with the methods of the :class:`.Simulation`::

    sim.create_observations(detectors=[det])
    sim.prepare_pointings()
    sim.precompute_pointings(pointings_dtype=np.float64)


How the boresight is specified
------------------------------

As LiteBIRD includes three focal planes and two telescopes, the
specification of the boresight requires some care. In
:cite:`2018:core:delabrouille` and :cite:`2019:pico:hanany`, the
boresight direction is encoded using just one number, the angle
between the boresight and the spin axis. However, both papers deal
with spacecrafts hosting only *one* focal plane.

The orientation of the boresight direction is specified using three
angles:

1. The ψ angle encodes the rotation of the focal plane with respect to
   the boresight direction itself, and it is ideally 0°;

2. The angle between the boresight direction and the spin axis is
   usually notated with the symbol β (among the three, this is the
   most crucial number: it is 65° for CORE, 69° for PICO);

3. Finally, the boresight can be rotated by an angle φ around the spin
   axis; this is important only when you have more than one focal
   plane. For LiteBIRD, :math:`\phi_\text{LFT} - \phi_\text{MHFT}
   \approx 180^\circ`.

.. raw:: html

   <iframe
       width="560"
       height="315"
       src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/WbV_7nKXM1c"
       frameborder="0"
       allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture"
       allowfullscreen>
   </iframe>

Interpretation of pointings
---------------------------

With «pointing», we refer to two different concepts:

1. The direction where the detector is looking at;

2. The orientation of the detector while looking at the sky.

Theoretically, one can encode the direction as a one-length vector
``(x, y, z)`` or as a couple of angles. LBS adopts the second option
to save memory, and it encodes directions using the colatitude (i.e.,
90° minus the latitude) and the longitude, commonly indicated with the
letters θ (colatitude) and φ (longitude).

The orientation of the detector (second point above) can be expressed
either as a vector tangent to the sky sphere or as an angle calculated
with respect to the meridian/parallel going through the point the
detector is looking at. Again, to reduce memory usage, our framework
only encodes the angle.

The method :meth:`.Observation.get_pointings` returns two matrices: a
“pointing matrix”, laid in memory as a :math:`(N, 3)` matrix, where
:math:`N` is the number of samples in the timeline, and the last
dimension holds the colatitude, longitude, and orientation (in
radians). The second matrix contains the angle of the HWP. Let's
visualize the position of these pointings on a Healpix map::

   import healpy, numpy as np
   import matplotlib.pylab as plt

   nside = 64
   pixidx = healpy.ang2pix(nside, pointings[:, 0], pointings[:, 1])
   m = np.zeros(healpy.nside2npix(nside))
   m[pixidx] = 1
   healpy.mollview(m)

.. image:: images/scanning-strategy-example.png


Custom scanning strategies
--------------------------

This section explains how LBS can model scanning strategies other than
the nominal «spinning» one. You will need to understand the functions
provided by the framework to deal with quaternions.

The framework uses a right-handed coordinate system, like the one
shown in figure:

.. image:: images/right-handed-coordinates.svg

where the grey arrows indicate the verse of *positive* rotations.
(They follow the usual right-hand rule: point your thumb along the
axis and the other fingers will point towards the positive direction
of the rotation.)


A simple scanning strategy
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We are now ready to discuss implementing other types of scanning
strategies. There are plenty of reasons why one would like to go
beyond the class :class:`.SpinningScanningStrategy`:

1. You want to study the effect of non-idealities, like second-order
   effects caused by contractions/dilations in the mechanical
   structure of the telescope that make the angle between the spin
   axis and the boresight vary with time.

2. You are thinking about how to make dedicated observations of some
   celestial source (e.g., the Crab Nebula) to calibrate the
   instruments.

To define a new scanning strategy, we define a descendant of the
:class:`.ScanningStrategy` class, an `Abstract Base Class (ABC)
<https://docs.python.org/3/library/abc.html>`_; the only mandatory
method is :meth:`.ScanningStrategy.generate_spin2ecl_quaternions`,
which takes as inputs the start time, the length of the simulation,
and the time interval to be used between consecutive quaternions. The
method must return an instance of the :class:`.RotQuaternion`,
containing the computed sequence of quaternions.

We will code here a straightforward scanning strategy, which does not
involve anything fancy: the spacecraft will spin around the Sun-Earth
axis, and the boresight direction will be along the same spin axis.
Thus, the boresight detector will see only the points along the
Ecliptic plane. This scanning strategy is scientifically useless, but
it is simple enough to be implemented in a few lines of code:

1. The transformation from boresight to the spin axis reference frame
   is the identity;

2. There is no precession of the spin axis; therefore, the latter
   stays on the Ecliptic axis;

3. The only rotation is caused by the revolution of the Sun-Earth axis
   around the Sun, which is implemented as a rotation on the `xy`
   plane, i.e., around the `z` axis.

The following code implements our mock scanning strategy::

   import litebird_sim as lbs
   from litebird_sim import RotQuaternion
   import astropy
   from typing import Union

   class SimpleScanningStrategy(lbs.ScanningStrategy):
       def generate_spin2ecl_quaternions(
           self,
           start_time: Union[float, astropy.time.Time],
           time_span_s: float,
           delta_time_s: float,
       ) -> RotQuaternion:
           # Compute how many quaternions are needed to cover
           # the time interval specified by "time_span_s"
           num_of_quaternions = (
               lbs.ScanningStrategy.optimal_num_of_quaternions(
                   time_span_s=time_span_s,
                   delta_time_s=delta_time_s,
               )
           )

           # Make room for the quaternions
           spin2ecliptic_quats = np.empty((num_of_quaternions, 4))

           # We compute the times when the quaternions need to be
           # calculated. Note that ScanningStrategy returns two
           # arrays ("time" and "time_s"), but we neglect the second
           # because we don't need it in this very simple case
           (time, _) = lbs.ScanningStrategy.get_times(
               start_time=start_time,
               delta_time_s=delta_time_s,
               num_of_quaternions=num_of_quaternions,
           )

           # Compute the angle on the Ecliptic plane between the x
           # axis and the Sun-Earth axis, possibly using AstroPy
           sun_earth_angles_rad = (
               lbs.calculate_sun_earth_angles_rad(time)
           )

           # This code is *not* optimized: in a real-world case,
           # you'll probably want to use Numba instead of the
           # following "for" loop
           for i in range(num_of_quaternions):
               # Rotate by 90° around the y axis (move the boresight
               # to the Ecliptic xy plane)
               spin2ecliptic_quats[i, :] = lbs.quat_rotation_y(np.pi / 2)

               # Simulate the revolution of the spacecraft around
               # the Sun using the angles computed above
               lbs.quat_left_multiply(
                   spin2ecliptic_quats[i, :],
                   *lbs.quat_rotation_z(sun_earth_angles_rad[i]),
               )

           # Return the quaternions wrapped in an instance of
           # "RotQuaternion"
           return lbs.RotQuaternion(
               start_time=start_time,
               sampling_rate_hz=1.0 / delta_time_s,
               quats=spin2ecliptic_quats,
           )

To test the class ``SimpleScanningStrategy``, we write some code
similar to the example presented at the beginning of this section.
However, we cannot simulate for just one hour, as it would not be
enough to see any change in the pointing direction: the only thing
that changes as time passes is the position of the Earth on the
Ecliptic plane, and it takes 365 days to make one revolution.
Therefore, we extend the length of the simulation to 365 days. Of
course, there is no need to use a high sampling frequency in our
example, so we use here just one sample per day; for the same reason,
instead of computing one quaternion every minute, we compute one
quaternion every 30 days::

   import astropy.units as u
   import healpy
   import numpy as np

   sim = lbs.Simulation(
       start_time=0,
       duration_s=(365 * u.day).to("s").value,
       description="Simple simulation",
       random_seed=12345,
   )

   sim.set_scanning_strategy(
       scanning_strategy=SimpleScanningStrategy(),
       delta_time_s=(30 * u.day).to("s").value
   )

   det = lbs.DetectorInfo(
       name="foo",
       sampling_rate_hz=1.0 / ((1.0 * u.day).to("s").value),
   )

   (obs,) = sim.create_observations(detectors=[det])
   lbs.prepare_pointings(obs, lbs.InstrumentInfo(), sim.spin2ecliptic_quats)
   pointings, _ = obs.get_pointings("all")

   m = np.zeros(healpy.nside2npix(64))
   pixidx = healpy.ang2pix(64, pointings[0, :, 0], pointings[0, :, 1])
   m[pixidx] = 1
   healpy.mollview(m)

Here is the result: we are indeed scanning the Ecliptic plane!

.. image:: images/simple-scanning-strategy.png


Observing point sources in the sky
----------------------------------

It is helpful to simulate the observation of point sources in the sky,
both for a scientific purpose and for instrument calibration. For
instance, an essential task in the calibration of a CMB space
experiment is the estimation of the radiation pattern
:math:`\gamma(\theta, \phi)` for each detector (sometimes
:math:`\gamma` is called the *beam function*). One can do this task
through the observation of a bright point source, like one of the
outer planets (Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, etc.): assuming that the source
is pointlike and neglecting every other emission from the sky, the
response measured by a detector is proportional to the radiation
pattern :math:`\gamma(\theta, \phi)`, where the angles :math:`\theta,
\phi` identify the position of the planet *in the reference frame of
the detector*, i.e., where :math:`\theta = 0` is the direction of the
main beam axis.

You can use the functions described in this chapter to analyze how
detectors will observe point sources in the sky, properly taking into
account proper motions of the sources (this applies to Solar System
objects, like planets and comets). The library provides the functions
:func:`.get_ecl2det_quaternions`, which has the same syntax as
:func:`.get_pointings` but returns a matrix with shape ``(N, 4)``
containing the ``N`` quaternions that transform from the Ecliptic
reference frame to the detector. Thus, you can use this method to
estimate how far from the main beam axis a celestial object is and its
orientation with respect to the orientation of the detector.

Here we show a simple example; the first part is identical to the
examples shown above (using the same scanning strategy as for CORE),
but here we employ AstroPy to compute the Ecliptic coordinates of
Jupiter during the simulation and convert them in the reference frame
of the boresight detector using :func:`.get_ecl2det_quaternions`:

.. testcode::

  import numpy as np
  import litebird_sim as lbs
  import astropy.time, astropy.units as u
  from astropy.coordinates import (
      ICRS,
      get_body_barycentric,
      BarycentricMeanEcliptic,
      solar_system_ephemeris,
  )

  sim = lbs.Simulation(
      # We use AstroPy times here!
      start_time=astropy.time.Time("2020-01-01T00:00:00"),
      duration_s=60.0,
      description="Simple simulation",
      random_seed=12345,
  )

  sim.set_scanning_strategy(
      scanning_strategy=lbs.SpinningScanningStrategy(
          spin_sun_angle_rad=np.deg2rad(30),
          spin_rate_hz=0.5 / 60.0,
          precession_rate_hz=1.0 / (4 * u.day).to("s").value,
      )
  )

  sim.set_instrument(
      lbs.InstrumentInfo(
          name="core",
          spin_boresight_angle_rad=np.deg2rad(65),
      ),
  )

  det = lbs.DetectorInfo(name="foo", sampling_rate_hz=10)
  obs, = sim.create_observations(detectors=[det])

  #################################################################
  # Here begins the juicy part

  solar_system_ephemeris.set("builtin")

  # The variable "icrs_pos" contains the x,y,z coordinates of Jupiter
  # in the ICRS reference frame for each sample time in the
  # observation.
  icrs_pos = get_body_barycentric(
      "jupiter",
      obs.get_times(astropy_times=True),
  )
  # Convert the ICRS r.f. into the barycentric mean Ecliptic r.f.,
  # which is the reference frame used by the LiteBIRD simulation
  # framework
  ecl_vec = (ICRS(icrs_pos)
      .transform_to(BarycentricMeanEcliptic())
      .cartesian
      .get_xyz()
      .value
  )

  # The variable ecl_vec is a 3×N matrix containing the vectors.
  # We normalize them so that each has length one (using the L_2
  # norm, hence ord=2)
  ecl_vec /= np.linalg.norm(ecl_vec, axis=0, ord=2)

  # Convert the matrix to a N×3 shape
  ecl_vec = ecl_vec.transpose()

  # Calculate the quaternions that convert the Ecliptic
  # reference system into the detector reference system
  quats = lbs.get_ecl2det_quaternions(
      obs,
      sim.spin2ecliptic_quats,
      bore2spin_quat=sim.instrument.bore2spin_quat,
      detector_quats=[det.quat],
  )

  # Make room for the xyz vectors in the detector reference frame
  det_vec = np.empty_like(ecl_vec)

  # Do the rotation!
  lbs.all_rotate_vectors(det_vec, quats[0], ecl_vec)

  print(det_vec)

.. testoutput::

  [[ 0.57053937  0.07219102 -0.81809124]
   [ 0.57038372  0.06957116 -0.8184267 ]
   [ 0.57023386  0.0669494  -0.81874973]
   ...
   [ 0.99293109 -0.0800506   0.08763421]
   [ 0.99310516 -0.07743726  0.08800916]
   [ 0.99327345 -0.07482179  0.08837171]]


Again, the vectors printed by this script are in the *reference frame
of the detector*, where the vector ``[0 0 1]`` indicates the main axis
of the detector. We can inspect how close Jupiter moves to the main
beam axis during the simulation if we convert the set of `(x, y, z)`
vectors into the angles :math:`\theta` (colatitude) and :math:`\phi`
(longitude), as the colatitude is simply the angular distance from the
main beam axis (:math:`\theta = 0`)::

  import healpy
  theta, phi = healpy.vec2ang(det_vec)

  import matplotlib.pylab as plt

  times = obs.get_times()
  plt.plot(times - times[0], np.rad2deg(theta))
  plt.xlabel("Time [s]")
  plt.ylabel("Angular separation [deg]")

.. image:: images/jupiter-angular-distance.svg

We see that Jupiter is ~10° away from the beam axis after ~30 seconds
since the start of the simulation.

API reference
-------------

.. automodule:: litebird_sim.scanning
    :members:
    :undoc-members:
    :show-inheritance:

.. automodule:: litebird_sim.pointings
    :members:
    :undoc-members:
    :show-inheritance:

.. automodule:: litebird_sim.pointings_in_obs
    :members:
    :undoc-members:
    :show-inheritance:
